Document SAML APIs (#45105)
elastic/elasticsearch: x-pack/docs/en/security/authentication/saml-guide.asciidoc

documentation above but in case you encounter issues while configuring a SAML realm, you can
look through our {stack-ov}/trb-security-saml.html[SAML troubleshooting documentation] that has
suggestions and resolutions for common issues.

> === SAML without {kib}

Reviewer: If we don't specify an anchor here, our build makes one up, which is not reliable. I suggest:
```suggestion
[[saml-no-kibana]]
=== SAML without {kib}
```

The SAML realm in {es} is designed to allow users to authenticate to {kib} and as
such, most of the parts of the guide above make the assumption that {kib} is used.
This section describes how a custom web application could use the relevant SAML
REST APIs in order to authenticate the users to {es} with SAML.

NOTE: This section assumes that the reader is familiar with the SAML 2.0 standard
and more specifically with the SAML 2.0 Web Browser Single Sign On profile.

Single sign-on realms such as OpenID Connect and SAML make use of the Token Service in
{es} and in principle exchange a SAML or OpenID Connect Authentication response for
an {es} access token and a refresh token. The access token is used as credentials
for subsequent calls to {es}. The refresh token enables the user to get new {es}
access tokens after the current one expires.

> ==== SAML realm

Reviewer: Likewise, we should have an anchor here too.  Otherwise, it is currently defaulting to "_saml_realm". For example:
```suggestion
[[saml-no-kibana-realm]]
==== SAML realm
```

You must create a SAML realm and configure it accordingly
in {es}. See <<saml-guide-authentication>>

> ==== Service Account user for accessing the APIs

Reviewer: Likewise, this is defaulting to "_service_account_user_for_accessing_the_apis" for an anchor.  I suggest explicitly setting it to something like this:
```suggestion
[[saml-no-kibana-user]]
==== Service Account user for accessing the APIs
```

cluster privilege will be necessary after the authentication takes place, so that the
the service account user can maintain access in order refresh access tokens on
behalf of the authenticated users or to subsequently log them out.

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/role/saml-service-role
{
  "cluster" : ["manage_saml", "manage_token"]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/user/saml-service-user
{
  "password" : "<somePasswordHere>",
  "roles"    : ["saml-service-role"]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE

[[saml-sp-init-sso]]
==== Handling the SP-initiated authentication flow

On a high level, the custom web application would need to perform the
following steps in order to authenticate a user with SAML against {es}:

. Make an HTTP POST request to `_security/saml/prepare`, authenticating as
the `saml-service-user` user. Use either the name of the SAML realm in the {es} configuration or the value for
the Assertion Consumer Service URL in the request body.

> See the {ref}/security-api-saml-prepare-authentication.html[SAML prepare authentication API] for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the <<security-api-saml-prepare-authentication,SAML prepare authentication API>> for more details.
```

. Handle the response from `/_security/saml/prepare`. The response from {es} will contain 3 parameters:
  `redirect`, `realm' and `id`. The custom web application would need to store the value for `id`
 in the user's session (client side in a cookie or server side if session information is
persisted this way). It must also redirect the user's browser to the URL that  was returned in the 
  `redirect` parameter. The `id` value should not be disregarded as it is used as a nonce in SAML in
order to mitigate against replay attacks.
. Handle a subsequent response from the SAML IdP. After the user is successfully authenticated with the
Identity Provider they will be redirected back to the Assertion Consumer Service URL. This `sp.acs` needs to be
defined as a URL which the custom web application handles. When it receives this HTTP POST request, the
custom web application must parse it and make an HTTP POST request itself to the
`_security/saml/authenticate` API. It must authenticate as the `saml-service-user` user and pass
the Base64 encoded SAML Response that was sent as the body of the request. It must also pass the value for `id` that it had saved in the user's session previously.
+

> See {ref}/security-api-saml-authenticate.html[SAML authenticate API] for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See <<security-api-saml-authenticate,SAML authenticate API>> for more details.
```

+
[source,js]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/saml/authenticate
{
  "content" : "PHNhbWxwOlJlc3BvbnNlIHhtbG5zOnNhbWxwPSJ1cm46b2FzaXM6bmFtZXM6dGM6U0FNTDoyLjA6cHJvdG9jb2wiIHhtbG5zOnNhbWw9InVybjpvYXNpczpuYW1lczp0YzpTQU1MOjIuMD.....",
  "ids" : ["4fee3b046395c4e751011e97f8900b5273d56685"]
}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE
// TEST[skip:handled in IT]
+
Elasticsearch will validate this and if all is correct will respond with an access token that can be used
as a `Bearer` token for subsequent requests. It also supplies a refresh token that can be later used to refresh the given

> access token as described in {ref}/security-api-get-token.html[get token API].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
access token as described in <<security-api-get-token,get token API>>.
```

and the SAML attribute values will be contained in the response as part of the <<saml-user-metadata>>.

==== Handling the IdP-initiated authentication flow

{es} can also handle the IdP-initiated Single Sign On flow of the SAML 2 Web Browser SSO profile. In this
case the authentication starts with an unsolicited authentication response from the SAML Identity
Provider. The difference with the <<saml-sp-init-sso, SP initiated SSO>> is that the web application needs to handle
requests to the `sp.acs` that will not come as responses to previous redirections. As such, it will not have a session
for the user already, and it will not have any stored values for the `id` parameter. The request to the
`_security/saml/authenticate` API will look like the one below in this case:

[source,js]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/saml/authenticate
{
  "content" : "PHNhbWxwOlJlc3BvbnNlIHhtbG5zOnNhbWxwPSJ1cm46b2FzaXM6bmFtZXM6dGM6U0FNTDoyLjA6cHJvdG9jb2wiIHhtbG5zOnNhbWw9InVybjpvYXNpczpuYW1lczp0YzpTQU1MOjIuMD.....",
  "ids" : []
}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE
// TEST[skip:handled in IT]

> ==== Handling the logout flow

Reviewer: This section URL defaults to "_handling_the_logout_flow", I suggest something like this:
```suggestion
[[saml-logout]]
==== Handling the logout flow
```

. At some point, if necessary, the custom web application can log the user out by using the
  {ref}/security-api-saml-logout.html[SAML logout API] and passing the access token and refresh token as parameters. For example:
+
[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/saml/logout
{
  "token" : "46ToAxZVaXVVZTVKOVF5YU04ZFJVUDVSZlV3",
  "refresh_token": "mJdXLtmvTUSpoLwMvdBt_w"
}
--------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE
// TEST[skip:handled in IT]
+
If the SAML realm is configured accordingly and the IdP supports it (see <<saml-logout>>), this request will trigger a SAML
SP-initiated Single Logout. In this case, the response will include a `redirect`
parameter indicating where the user needs to be redirected at the IdP in order to complete the logout.
. Alternatively, the IdP might initiate the Single Logout flow at some point. In order to handle this, 
the Logout URL (`sp.logout`) needs to be handled by the custom web app. The query part of the URL that the
user will be redirected to will contain a SAML Logout request and this query part needs to be relayed to {es}

> using the {ref}/security-api-saml-invalidate.html[SAML invalidate API] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the <<security-api-saml-invalidate,SAML invalidate API>>
```

documentation above but in case you encounter issues while configuring a SAML realm, you can
look through our {stack-ov}/trb-security-saml.html[SAML troubleshooting documentation] that has
suggestions and resolutions for common issues.

=== SAML without {kib}

The SAML realm in {es} is designed to allow users to authenticate to {kib} and as
such, most of the parts of the guide above make the assumption that {kib} is used.
This section describes how a custom web application could use the relevant SAML

> REST APIs in order to authenticate the users to {es}, with SAML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
REST APIs in order to authenticate the users to {es} with SAML.
```

Single sign-on realms such as OpenID Connect and SAML make use of the Token Service in
{es} and in principle exchange a SAML or OpenID Connect Authentication response for
an {es} access token and a refresh token. The access token is used as credentials
for subsequent calls to {es}. The refresh token enables the user to get new {es}
access tokens after the current one expires.

> ==== SAML Realm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== SAML realm
```

> An SAML realm needs to be created and configured accordingly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A SAML realm needs to be created and configured accordingly
```

in {es}. See <<saml-guide-authentication>>

==== Service Account user for accessing the APIs

The realm is designed with the assumption that there needs to be a privileged entity
acting as an authentication proxy. In this case, the custom web application is the
authentication proxy handling the authentication of end users ( more correctly,
"delegating" the authentication to the SAML Identity Provider ). The SAML related
APIs require authentication and the necessary authorization level for the authenticated

> user. For this reason, a Service Account user needs to be created and assigned a role

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user. For this reason, you must create a Service Account user and assign it a role
```

> that gives them the `manage_saml` cluster privilege. The use of the `manage_token`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that gives it the `manage_saml` cluster privilege. The use of the `manage_token`
```

cluster privilege will be necessary after the authentication takes place, so that the
the service account user can maintain access in order refresh access tokens on
behalf of the authenticated users or to subsequently log them out.

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/role/saml-service-role
{
  "cluster" : ["manage_saml", "manage_token"]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/user/saml-service-user
{
  "password" : "<somePasswordHere>",
  "roles"    : ["saml-service-role"]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE

==== Handling the authentication flow

On a high level, the custom web application would need to perform the

> following steps in order to authenticate a user with SAML against {es}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
following steps in order to authenticate a user with SAML against {es}:
```

. Make an HTTP POST request to `_security/saml/prepare`, authenticating as

> the `saml-service-user` user, using either the name of the SAML realm in the {es} configuration or the value for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `saml-service-user` user. Use either the name of the SAML realm in the {es} configuration or the value for
```

the Assertion Consumer Service URL in the request body.

> See the {ref}/security-api-saml-prepare-authentication.html[SAML Prepare Authentication API] for more details

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the {ref}/security-api-saml-prepare-authentication.html[SAML prepare authentication API] for more details.
```

+
[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/saml/prepare
{
  "realm" : "saml1"
}
--------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE

. Handle the response from `/_security/saml/prepare`. The response from {es} will contain 3 parameters:
  `redirect`, `realm' and `id`. The custom web application would need to store the value for `id`
 in the user's session (client side in a cookie or server side if session information is

> persisted this way) and redirect the user's browser to the URL that will be contained in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
persisted this way). It must also redirect the user's browser to the URL that  was returned in the 
```

>   `redirect` value. The `id` value should not be disregarded as it is used as a nonce in SAML in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `redirect` parameter. The `id` value should not be disregarded as it is used as a nonce in SAML in
```

order to mitigate against replay attacks.
. Handle a subsequent response from the SAML IdP. After the user is successfully authenticated with the

> Identity Provider they will be redirected back to the Assertion Consumer Service URL. This (`sp.acs`) needs to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Identity Provider they will be redirected back to the Assertion Consumer Service URL. This `sp.acs` needs to be
```

> defined as a URL which the custom we application handles. Upon receiving this HTTP POST request, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
defined as a URL which the custom web application handles. When it receives this HTTP POST request, the
```

> custom web application will need to parse that and make an HTTP POST request itself to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
custom web application must parse it and make an HTTP POST request itself to the
```

> `_security/saml/authenticate` API, again - authenticating as the `saml-service-user` user - passing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`_security/saml/authenticate` API. It must authenticate as the `saml-service-user` user and pass
```

> the Base64 encoded SAML Response that was sent as the body of the request as well as the value for `id` that it had saved in the user's session previously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Base64 encoded SAML Response that was sent as the body of the request. It must also pass the value for `id` that it had saved in the user's session previously.
```

+

> See {ref}/security-api-saml-authenticate.html[SAML Authenticate API] for more details

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See {ref}/security-api-saml-authenticate.html[SAML authenticate API] for more details.
```

+
[source,js]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/saml/authenticate
{
  "content" : "PHNhbWxwOlJlc3BvbnNlIHhtbG5zOnNhbWxwPSJ1cm46b2FzaXM6bmFtZXM6dGM6U0FNTDoyLjA6cHJvdG9jb2wiIHhtbG5zOnNhbWw9InVybjpvYXNpczpuYW1lczp0YzpTQU1MOjIuMD.....",
  "ids" : ["4fee3b046395c4e751011e97f8900b5273d56685"]
}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE
// TEST[skip:handled in IT]
+
Elasticsearch will validate this and if all is correct will respond with an access token that can be used

> as a `Bearer` token for subsequent requests and a refresh token that can be later used to refresh the given

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as a `Bearer` token for subsequent requests. It also supplies a refresh token that can be later used to refresh the given
```

access token as described in {ref}/security-api-get-token.html[get token API].

> . The response to calling `/_security/saml/authenticate` will only contain the username of the authenticated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The response to calling `/_security/saml/authenticate` will contain only the username of the authenticated
```

> user. If you need to get the values for the SAML Attributes for that user that were contained in the SAML

Reviewer: It is unclear to me what some of the "that" occurrences in this sentence refer to. Maybe:

If you need to get the values for the SAML attributes that were returned in the SAML response for that user, you can call the authenticate API. Use the access token....

Response, you can call the Authenticate API `/_security/_authenticate/` using the access token as a `Bearer` token

> and the SAML attribute values will be contained in the response as part of the <<saml-user-metadata>>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the SAML attribute values will be contained in the response as part of the <<saml-user-metadata>>.
```

==== Handling the logout flow
. At some point, if necessary, the custom web application can log the user out by using the

>   {ref}/security-api-saml-logout.html[SAML Logout API] passing the access token and refresh token as parameters. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  {ref}/security-api-saml-logout.html[SAML logout API] and passing the access token and refresh token as parameters. For example:
```

+
[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/saml/logout
{
  "token" : "46ToAxZVaXVVZTVKOVF5YU04ZFJVUDVSZlV3",
  "refresh_token": "mJdXLtmvTUSpoLwMvdBt_w"
}
--------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE
// TEST[skip:handled in IT]
+

> If the SAML realm is configured accordingly and the IdP supports it, this request will trigger a SAML

Reviewer: Where/how can they figure out if the realm is configured accordingly?

Author: They would need to have configured it accordingly themselves if they wish to (it's not mandatory). This is described in the `SAML Logout` section higher up in the saml guide, should we add an internal link to it ?

Reviewer: Sure, a link is likely a good idea.

SP-initiated Single Logout. In this case, the response will include a `redirect`
parameter indicating where the user needs to be redirected at the IdP in order to complete the logout.
. Alternatively, the IdP might initiate the Single Logout flow at some point. In order to handle this, 
the Logout URL (`sp.logout`) needs to be handled by the custom web app. The query part of the URL that the
user will be redirected to will contain a SAML Logout request and this query part needs to be relayed to {es}

> using the {ref}/security-api-saml-invalidate.html[SAML Invalidate API] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the {ref}/security-api-saml-invalidate.html[SAML invalidate API] 
```

+
[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/saml/invalidate
{
  "query" : "SAMLRequest=nZFda4MwFIb%2FiuS%2BmviRpqFaClKQdbvo2g12M2KMraCJ9cRR9utnW4Wyi13sMie873MeznJ1aWrnS3VQGR0j4mLkKC1NUeljjA77zYyhVbIE0dR%2By7fmaHq7U%2BdegXWGpAZ%2B%2F4pR32luBFTAtWgUcCv56%2Fp5y30X87Yz1khTIycdgpUW9kY7WdsC9zxoXTvMvWuVV98YyMnSGH2SYE5pwALBIr9QKiwDGpW0oGVUznGeMyJZKFkQ4jBf5HnhUymjIhzCAL3KNFihbYx8TBYzzGaY7EnIyZwHzCWMfiDnbRIftkSjJr%2BFu0e9v%2B0EgOquRiiZjKpiVFp6j50T4WXoyNJ%2FEWC9fdqc1t%2F1%2B2F3aUpjzhPiXpqMz1%2FHSn4A&SigAlg=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.w3.org%2F2001%2F04%2Fxmldsig-more%23rsa-sha256&Signature=MsAYz2NFdovMG2mXf6TSpu5vlQQyEJAg%2B4KCwBqJTmrb3yGXKUtIgvjqf88eCAK32v3eN8vupjPC8LglYmke1ZnjK0%2FKxzkvSjTVA7mMQe2AQdKbkyC038zzRq%2FYHcjFDE%2Bz0qISwSHZY2NyLePmwU7SexEXnIz37jKC6NMEhus%3D",
  "realm" : "saml1"
}
--------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE
// TEST[skip:handled in IT]
+
The custom web application will then need to also handle the response, which will include a `redirect`

> parameter with a URL in the IdP that contains the SAML Logout response and should redirect the user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameter with a URL in the IdP that contains the SAML Logout response. The application should redirect the user
```
